======================================================================
                  Requirements of Programming Tools
======================================================================
----------------------------------------------------------------------
                               EWD 251
----------------------------------------------------------------------

:Author: Edsger W. Dijkstra
:Transcribed by: Felipe Febrero Hidalgo
:Revised: Sun, 19 Dec 2004
:Source: http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/transcriptions/EWD02xx/EWD251.html



We feel that the design of a programming language should be guided by
a conception as clear as possible of the requirements it should
satisfy. Regarding a programming language as a tool to be used by the
programmer and taking the position that, for the tool to be really
useful, it should assist the programmer as much as possible in the
most difficult aspects of his task, we hope to derive the necessary
clues from a careful analysis of (nature and source of) his
difficulties, giving due recognition to the growth (in scale and
scope) of his task.

Among the major difficulties we recognize his duty to create
*reliable* mechanisms and to create programs in such a fashion that
the possibility of program modification has been catered for as much
as desirable. These difficulties are mentioned explicitly because from
their analysis we expect, if not yet a discipline, at least new
guidelines for the creating programmer.

We have avoided the word "language" in our subject description and
have used the somewhat more general term "tool" as an expression of
our feeling that current practice of program composition is in urgent
need of revision and the "programming languages" as they are used now
may turn out to be too tightly connected with the current practice to
remain an adequate term for the tools eventually needed.

We expect the Working Group to act as a forum between a rather small
number of sufficiently kindred spirits with sufficiently different
backgrounds, so that it can provide an opportunity for mutual
education and inspiration.

We feel it appropriate to suggest that IFIP could sponsor this
activity. The motivation of the effort seems well-justified, its
potential incompatibility with vested interests (of shorter range)
could well justify some protection such as IFIP could provide.

Edsger W.Dijkstra
